Shalom Aleichem, we are continuing with the halachas of the holiday of Shavuos and in particular somebody who stays up all night learning and we have two separate questions in this regard. The first one is as follows, somebody is learning all night and now it's what's called Alos HaShachar. Alos HaShachar is a certain amount of time before sunrise, sunrise is Neitz and Alos HaShachar, there are different ways to compute it. Some view it as a set amount of time before Neitz. for example 72 minutes or 90 minutes and many Poschim are of the view that it's a certain amount of degrees that the sun is under the horizon so there are different ways to compute it. But the question in general is once it's the time for Alos HaShachar that's the day. Effectively that's halachically the daytime and that's when we are able to do various mitzvahs and we have various obligations including the need to say Birka Satorah. Birka Satorah often Sometimes people will say it earlier if they wake up earlier, but now is really the daytime, we've been learning or not. So now the obligation for the next day is going to come, but again, when it comes to Ashkenazi, we're not able to say Birka Satorah if we were up all night, we have one of two solutions. One solution is somebody else can say it for me, somebody who slept all night, somebody who's Svarti, who does say it even though he's up, all night, so that's one possibility. Or you can be Yotzei, the Chiyuvim, we'll say the mitzvah, the chiyuv, of Birka Satorah by saying the bruch of Ahava Rabah right before the Kriya Shema. So right before the Kriya Shema we say Ahava Rabah, that would replace, that would be in place of the Birka Satorah. But our question is as follows, somebody knows all this, and it comes the time of Alos HaShachar, time now, is to say the Birka Satorah, he doesn't have somebody to say it for him, and he's not up to Ahava Rabah, can he continue? learning Torah, because now he hasn't said the Birka Satorah. So that is our question, and Rabbi Amram Fried says as follows, it appears that it's mutter to continue learning, even though it's after Alos HaShachar, now it's effectively daytime, why is it not a problem? So he says, wait, you should wait until somebody can say it for you, or until you say Ahava Rabah, because, and this is an interesting distinction, he says it is not an isser, it's not prohibited, to learn Torah before Birka Satorah. It's not a prohibition, it's not an isser, but rather there is an obligation to say Birka Satorah before learning. It's not an isser, it's not an isser that you're violating, but there is an ongoing obligation to say Birka Satorah before learning, and accordingly, right now, because he has no solution, he has nowhere, he has no way to say the Bracha, he can continue learning. If it were a prohibition, to learn, if it was an isser to learn before Birka Satorah, he would not be permitted to violate the prohibition. But if it is an obligation to say Birka Satorah before learning, and he has no way to fulfill that obligation right now, he can continue learning until he has a way to fulfill that obligation. Either somebody is going to say the Birka Satorah for him, or if there's no one around that can do it, he can do it, it's the Ahava Rabbah when they're davening Shacharis, then he would be Yotzei the the Bracha's Birka Satorah. Okay, that's point number one. Point number two is when it comes to the Netilas Yadayim, this is actually related in the following sense, that there is a Machlokes in the views, what obligates the washing of the Netilas Yadayim in the morning? Is it only when somebody sleeps, Lina Goremes, so when somebody sleeps, wakes up, that causes Tumah on the hand, and accordingly you have to wash the Netilas Yadayim, or is it not that is Gorem. Lila Goremes, the night time, even if you don't sleep, there's an obligation once Alos HaShachar comes, so we're using the same time, Alos HaShachar, once that comes, now it's going from night time to day time, there is an obligation to wash that. Again, we have two different views, two divergent views. Is it the sleep that causes the obligation? Or is it the night time? And again, the Nav Kamina between them is somebody who did not sleep. Somebody who did not sleep, he has no sleep, so he's not obligated based on the first reason to wash the Netilas Yadayim, but based on the second reason, even if you didn't sleep, but night time is the cause of the Tumah, then you would have to wash your hands, regardless when it comes to Alos HaShachar. So says Rav Amram, that's the case, Tzarech La Kumim Komo, when it comes to Alos HaShachar, you'd have to get up immediately, miyad, when it comes to the time of Alos HaShachar. He does say that many people are lenient on this, they wait, they're not getting up immediately, they lack alacrity in this, but be that as it may, this is what should be done. Alos HaShachar is the time that there's an obligation. So when's Alos HaShachar? He says for purposes of this, we would use 72 minutes before Neitz, before sunrise, and not 90 minutes before Neitz. So two alachas that we've seen when it comes to the Birka Satorah, one will be permitted to continue learning after Alos HaShachar until somebody can say Birka Satorah or until he gets to Ava Ramah, when it comes to Neti L'syadayim, another obligation, when it comes to Alos HaShachar, somebody indeed should get up and watch Neti L'syadayim at that point, although people are lenient on this. Thanks so much for listening. Have a wonderful day.